# git & GitHub
Normally, I make a repository on GitHub, then clone it using `git clone` onto my laptop or desktop to do editing. I'll explain my workflow in a separate paragraph down below, so don't worry if it seems foreign in this opening bit.

## git
`git` is a *version control system* that comes installed on most Linux systems (I don't recall whether it's installed on Ubuntu or not, but can be installed with `sudo apt-get install git`), and written by the creator of Linux, Linus Torvalds.
`git` uses a system of *repositories* to keep track of your data and changes made to it. Each change made is kept in a *commit*, and commits can hold multiple changes to the same file or to multiple files - normally, though, commits are used to keep track of changes that may break a program/system or make something act in a nonsensical manner. `git` also uses a system of *releases* and *branches* to keep track of larger changes to programs or files if you should choose to do so, but for the purposes of someone who's using `git` for mainly writing, I don't use it often - when using `git` for programming, the likelihood of using branches and releases more often goes up.
* `git add [filename]` - *stages* the file named for the next commit - basically, takes all the changes made to the selected file since the last commit, and tells `git` to list the changes when the commit is made. Normally, I do a bunch of work, and use `git add -A` to automatically add any changed files to the commit.
* `git commit -m "[commit message]"` - makes the actual commit, with the title/message as listed after `-m`. This is normally enough to keep track of major changes, and I often do it before *pushing* my changes to GitHub (explained further down).

## GitHub
GitHub is a website ([github.com](https://github.com)) used for hosting `git` repositories. Normally, after creating an account, you can make, edit, and delete your own publicly visible repositories. If you sign up for the [GitHub Student Developer Pack](https://education.github.com/pack), you will then be able to make private repositories (invisible to everyone bar the people you give access), as well as get some other programming & development-related free stuff. 
After making a remote repository (normally just referred to as a repository) on GitHub, you'll probably want to edit it on your laptop or desktop - and you can do that by *cloning the repository*. After the repository's cloned, you can move files to the remote repository by *pushing to the repository* or *pushing to the remote*, and you can get any changes from the repository by *pulling from the repository* or *pulling from the remote*. 
**PLEASE NOTE** that neither `git` nor GitHub will move any files to or from GitHub or another hosting site without you explicity doing something - you will always have to push your changes to and from the remote repository in order to have the changes synced across devices. This is initally a pain, but you get used to it relatively quickly, and once you adapt the way you work to pushing and pulling, it starts to feel like second nature.
* `git clone [url]` - clone a remote repository into a new folder within your current directory, inside a folder named after the repository (for example, if you cloned the remote that this repository is from, then you would have a new folder - `writing` - in the directory you cloned the repository into). 
Think of it as downloading the repository as a folder, without having to unzip any of it, and without having to set up a git repository all over again.
* `git push origin master` - push all commits that currently are not on the remote to the default GitHub branch and server. This is normally what you want to do after making a bunch of commits and/or you make a really important change - I normally do it after I finish a chunk of work, and one last time before I pack up to switch locations or head home. Most of the time, this command will ask you for your username and password before pushing to the remote repository. It'll probably display some status information too. 
If you were pushing from the current repository into a different remote branch within the same repository (for example, if you were using the GitHub Development Model or whatever they call it now that uses a mess of branches to keep track of what code is which), you would use `git push origin [branch name]`, where [branch name] is the name of the branch that you want to push to. Note that this will overwrite the contents of the remote branch with whatever you committed locally. 
* `git pull origin master` - pull all commits from the default remote server branch that have occurred since you last pushed to the `master` branch. If you edit any files on GitHub instead of your computer, you should probably run this before editing files on your computer to avoid *conflicting commits*, which are weird and sometimes hard to resolve events that occur when there are different versions of a file or files stored on your local laptop or desktop and the remote server.
Like `git push`, you can change the branch you're pulling from by using `git pull origin [branch name], where again, [branch name] is the branch that you want to pull from. Again, note that by pulling from a remote branch, you'll be taking any commits from that branch and putting it on the branch you're currently in (by default, the master branch).

## My workflow with git and GitHub
1. Make the repository on GitHub, with the appropriate license and README - pretty self-explanatory. This is pretty easy to do.
2. Clone the repository to the machines that I'll be editing files on & working in the repository with - normally, I'll do this by clicking the green "Clone or Download" button on GitHub, copying the link that ends in `.git`, and pasting it after `git clone` in a terminal, i.e. `git clone https://github.com/nikolojedison/writing.git`.
3. Set up any directories and files that I want to start off with, then commit them - note that `git` will not keep track of empty directories, so you'll need to either place a file in them for `git` to keep track of them or you'll just wait until you need a directory for a file, then make it & put the file in it.
4. Make a commit for the initial setup and push it back to GitHub (`git add -A`, `git commit -m "Basic setup stuff"`, `git push origin master`) - I actually find myself waiting until this step to clone the repository to other devices, mostly because it's easier to clone a repository from scrach than pull the files and folders after I've set them up, committed them, and pushed them
5. Do any editing that I want in the editors that I require (`vim`, `libreoffice`, etc.)
6. Make a commit for the major changes once I feel like it needs to be made, then push it to GitHub (`git add -A`, `git commit -m "[commit message]"`, `git push origin master`) - some people will tell you that there's only a certain subset of times that you should commit, but I've found that it honestly just takes a certain feel for when you should do it and push to master.
7. Repeat 5 and 6 as needed, pulling changes not made on the current device as needed.

